Transcript: Nix Futures Planning

All right, let's plan something that I wanted to do for a while. The idea is that many tasks in Nix require the use of an external program to run and maintain state that then gets used within the Nix code itself.

One example that comes to mind is obviously dependency pinning, which can be implemented by various providers; each have their pros and cons. For example, npins (NPINS) will go and fetch repositories from GitHub, from Docker, and from a few other places, but it's not a complete list. And it's not pluggable in the sense that if you want to add a different kind of provider, then you need to make a pull request to npins and you have to manage it.

It also has the side effect—or the negative property—of needing to use a separate system to define these pins. And it also moves the declaration of what to fetch away from its use. So, a pattern I use a lot in Nix is the "dendritic" pattern. And what I find most useful about it is that I can put the declaration of things where they are being used. So I can just localize my code by function; so that reduces clutter and it makes it a lot easier to have an overview of what's happening.

So, I would call this "Futures," because it's kind of similar to futures in the async/await concept, or a bit like promises if you're used to JavaScript. Where a future is targeted towards a provider and has some input data, and then produces some output data, but also contains a state to know whether the output data is available or whether the output has failed or succeeded.

This means that we can implement dependency fetching like npins, or we could also implement data fetches that are more generic, like "go fetch the SSH host key from a host," or "go execute some arbitrary command," and then proceed with the evaluation further.

It would be advisable that these providers can return evaluation errors. So that if a package is required, then you can just add a future instance in the module where you use it, and then evaluation would fail with "Go run the futures" so that the hash and everything else can be computed so that the data could be available afterwards.

You could also use that as a way to fetch data, you can use it to pin dependencies, and you can also use it to update random things that are locked inside the repository. So you can see that as also a generic kind of lock file implementation, just because of the way it functions.

There are many places in Nix packages, for example, where you have to provide either a dependencies hash, or you have to provide a file that is generated that contains the appropriate dependencies. And that file needs to be regenerated whenever something else changes. So there's typically a pattern where you try to name the fixed output derivation using the hash of the input so that it gets regenerated because one of the big problems with FODs (Fixed Output Derivations) is that they are defined by content. So it won't pick up changes to, let's say, your Go module definitions.

So if you use something like gomod2nix and you have to run gomod2nix in order to generate the gomod2nix.toml file, and then that lets you build Go applications using that. There's an equivalent also for .NET applications where you have to go and fetch dependencies. nix-to-container also uses something similar where you have, if you're pulling from a remote Docker image, you can just run "fetch manifest" directly from the derivation itself. And then you set that manifest in your repository, you place it next to your package, and then that instructs nix-to-container to go and fetch the layers from your base image in a fully deterministic way.

So, these are the use cases I see so far. And I'm sure there's a lot more. I think the main advantage of standardizing that into a single module is to be able to plug in different providers with a single interface, and to have a centralized way of viewing and updating the status of these futures, and potentially running external programs to do so. And also being able to define all sorts of different kind of futures that need to be resolved, and even updated and invalidated, even without integrating with any specific fetcher of some kind. And I believe we can do that in a very generic way.

Implementation goals for this would be to do the minimum necessary to get something functional. I believe we could start with something very simple, like: "Oh, build this derivation, then run it, and then put the output in some file," and then that will generalize to whatever we want to use it with.

npins would be a nice thing. I think also being able to update your flake.nix file using something like nima—which can make updates to Nix code imperatively using a command line utility. That means that we would be able to declare flake inputs from different modules, and they would all get merged together. And running the tool would kind of aggregate and write (or update) the flake.nix file, and then you'll be able to re-run the execution so that you may access the resolved values or the input—the resolved inputs in this case.
